---
layout: post
title: "Every aspiring artist should learn to tap dance"
---
...or sing...or perform Shakespeare...or play the piano. I did all of those things as part of my B.F.A. program at the Boston Conservatory. BoCo was a place for artists to focus solely on their craft. While most colleges require at least some introductory math or science classes even in art majors, the conservatory learning environment offers no such coursework. With no STEM classes in sight, this training still helped me be a better scientist.

When I say that every aspiring scientist should take part in some kind of artistic endeavor, there are some obvious benefits that may come to mind. Creativity is a key component of science. From problem solving to science communication to preventing burn out, creativity is a key component of a good researcher’s toolbelt. But there’s another benefit, another skill, that you gain from artistic training that I’ve been thinking about a lot lately. It has very little to do with creativity. 

There’s an alley alongside one of the BoCo’s main buildings on Fenway (yes, that Fenway). The building is a historic brownstone. Beautiful with its brick walls and wooden floors. Severely lacking in central air conditioning. In the summer, the practice room windows are pushed open to catch any passing breeze. When that happens, the alley fills with the sound of artists hard at work. All at once you could hear the powerful bellow of a baritone, the sweet vibrato of a violin, the shouts of a Shakespearean sonnet, the rumbling thunder of twenty dancers landing in pliė…all in different keys…all in different tempos. The meticulous refinement of technique.

Training as an artist teaches you to embrace the process rather than expecting shortcuts to a polished product. You learn to be methodical and tenacious in the acquisition of new skills. You learn that you will do hours of work that the audience will never directly see. But you know it will make you a better artist and the audience will feel it in your performance. Transitioning from completing labs in a science class to independent research is kind of like switching from walking on a well maintained sidewalk to hiking off-trail. It’s absolutely normal to feel frustrated. Your experiments will not go to plan, your results will not always be straightforward, you will put in a tremendous amount of work that won’t end up seeing the light of day. It’s okay. This is part of the process and there are no shortcuts, be it great art or great science. 
